Cert diffusion (#37)
tweag/cardano-peras: design/protocol-changes/certificate-vote-diffusion.tex

> \section{Vote and certificate diffusion}

Reviewer: Should we rename the file?

\subsection{Certificate diffusion mini-protocol}%
\label{sec:certificate-diffusion}

\paragraph{Requirements.}

> Diffusion of certificates is required in the following contexts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diffusion of certificates is required both for syncing (a) and caught-up (b) nodes:
```

\begin{enumerate}
\item
  Primarily, syncing nodes/pools need to be able to obtain historical certificates in order to choose the correct historical chain, even though certificates do not (meaningfully) affect the ledger state.

>   Concretely, nodes bootstrapping via Ouroboros Genesis (to minimize trust assumptions) need to be able to assess the weight of competing historical chains in order to resist adversarial \emph{long-range attacks}.

Reviewer: Reference for long range attack?

Author: Referenced our Genesis documentation :+1:

>   Computing the weight of a chain requires the corresponding certificates indicating which blocks are boosted (potentially multiple times).

Reviewer: > (potentially multiple times)

We fear this might bring more confusion than clarity at this stage of the document.

Author: Good point, this subtlety should not matter in this context, thanks :+1:

  See \cref{sec:weighted genesis} for more details.

>   Even if a syncing node did not encounter any adversarial challengers (and hence didn't ever need to compute weight), it still must get all certificates in order to in turn be able to serve them to \emph{other} peers syncing \emph{from} that node, as these \emph{do} might require them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Even if a syncing node did not encounter any adversarial challengers (and hence didn't ever need to compute weight), it still must get all certificates. Indeed, \emph{other} peers syncing from that node (e.g., in the future) might encounter adversaries and therefore require those certificates.
```

Feel free to choose any other formulation, of course. Just:

- maybe avoid “all certificates (in order to)” because we might read “(all certificates in order) to”
- not sure about “do might”
- we got confused by the “that” and “these” and “them”

  Briefly, there is a \enquote{duty to remember} certificates even if they are not directly useful for the caught-up node anymore.

  The Cardano implementation of Ouroboros Genesis \parencite{genesis-implementation-documentation} requires that syncing nodes are always connected to at least one honest peer.

>   In practice, this is guaranteed by connectiong to a sufficient number of appropriately sampled peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In practice, this is guaranteed by connecting to a sufficient number of appropriately sampled peers.
```

\item [\argfont{objectIds}, \argfont{responseToIds}]
  In its simplest form, a list of Peras round numbers.

  As an optimization, compact/compressed representations are possible, for example
  \begin{itemize}
  \item
    a round followed by a bitset for the subsequent rounds, indicating whether a certificate is present, or
  \item
    a round followed by a run-length encoding of the subsequent rounds.
    This is motivated by the observation that in Peras, rounds are (not) successful in larger runs, either because all rounds are successful due to sufficient honest votes, and if not, a lengthy cooldown period (with no successful rounds to due honest abstention) of unsuccessful rounds.
  \end{itemize}
  The \argfont{responseToIds} function is then decoding this compact representation.
\item [\argfont{initialPayload}]
  A Peras round number.

  Partially synced/recently caught-up peers can use this to receive certificates starting from the first round for which they do not yet have a certificate, avoiding the transfer of older, already-downloaded data.\footnote{
  This is conceptually analogous to \msg{MsgFindIntersect} in the ChainSync protocol.}
\end{description}

> An honest server answers requests for more round numbers by monotonically sending those for which it has a certificate in ascending order, until the client is caught-up, in which case the server blocks (or returns empty results) until it observes new certificates arising from successful Peras voting rounds.

Author: I think we can just change this to "almost monotonically" here, and refer to the discussion further below for more details.

At any time, it will serve the certificates corresponding to unacknowledged round numbers, while enforcing an upper bound on the this quantity.

> This design leverages the fact that there can only be at most one certificate per round, which allows us to elide data like the point of the block that is being certified/boosted.

Author: Now reads: 

> This design leverages the fact that there can only be at most one certificate per round, which allows us to elide data like the point of the block that is being certified/boosted, justifying the use of round numbers as certificate IDs.

> In particular, it does not matter who we download a certificate for a particular from.

Author: Added "round" :+1:

  Usually, it will receive one new round number per peer every \perasRoundSlots{} slots, but given that the node now participates in vote diffusion, it is not necessary to actually download the certificate.

  An exception is the scenario where the node has downloaded all votes for a round without observing a quorum, but still received this round number via the certificate diffusion protocol.
  In this case, the node will download the certificate via certificate diffusion.
  This can only happen due to adversarial vote equivocation, see \cref{sec:attack equivocations}.
\end{itemize}

Clients can ensure progress in this protocol w.r.t.\ adversarial servers by enforcing appropriate timeouts and a monotonicity property on the advertised round numbers:
\begin{enumerate}
\item
  Prompt delivery of requested certificates can be ensured by protocol-level timeouts, or a via more elaborate mechanism like a \emph{leaky token bucket} as used in the Cardnao Genesis implementation  \parencite{genesis-implementation-documentation} which handles temporary latency spikes more gracefully.
\item\label{enumi:cert diffusion monotonicity}

>   The sequence of round numbers sent by the server must increase strictly monotonically, or alternatively (as part of an implementation tradeoff) \emph{almost} monotonically, as honest nodes can observe the certificate for round $r$ before the one for round $s$ despite $r>s$, but only for small $r-s$, see \cref{sec:votes certs from the past}.\footnote{

Author: > We don't see how strict monotonicity is actually an option here. Wouldn't that get almost-caught-up (or caught-up) nodes blocked?

The idea of the strict monotonicity is to shift the complexity to the server: If an honest server observes a certificate for round $r$, and round $r-1$ was not part of a cooldown period, that it knows that it will soon receive a cert for round $r-1$ (see the new section "Handling votes and certificates from the past" that is linked here).
So can only block for a short amount of time.

I am not yet sure whether this is actually what we want to go with.

> Maybe it could also be solved by the leaky token bucket of (a), by only giving a token on a cert of best round number so far.

Thanks for bringing that idea up again, I will add it here.

>   The sequence of round numbers sent by the server must increase strictly monotonically, or alternatively (as part of an implementation tradeoff) \emph{almost} monotonically, as honest nodes can observe the certificate for round $r$ before the one for round $s$ despite $r>s$, but only for small $r-s$, see \cref{sec:votes certs from the past}.\footnote{

Author: I removed the strict monotonicity idea again; the potential upsides are too unclear to warrang complicating the presentation here.

I added a short description of the LoP/"leaky bucket for progress" idea.
